The illusoryTLS Asymmetric Backdoor: August Dupin Meets the
Kleptographer Y


A submission by Alfonso De Gregorio (@secYOUre) to the 1st Underhanded
Crypto Contest


Category: Add a Backdoor


0. Introduction

Today's Web PKI is fragile. We are, as a security community, witnessing 
with increasing frequency incidents, vulnerabilities, dramas, and 
failures of the infrastructure we daily entrust our business upon.

- China Internet Network Information Center (CNNIC), 2015
- Lenovo, 2015
- National Informatics Centre of India, 2014
- ANSSI, 2013
- Trustwave, 2012
- Türktrust, 2011-2013
- DigiNotar, 2011
- Comodo, 2011
- Verisign, 2010

In the aggregate, these and other missteps, malicious or otherwise,
allowed the impersonation of a number of high profile websites and
granted to the impersonating entities the ability to spy on a
sizable number of unsuspecting site users. 

This is already unfortunate. If "No silent failure" is the
pinnacle goal of security engineering [DG2], undetected impersonation
is no measure of success in our engineering effort. As if that were not
enough cause for concern, now we are discussing about building
cryptographic backdoors.

This is a timely topic often debated as matter for a government to
legislate on. This work approaches it as a space that some entities 
might have practically explored regardless of the policy framework. 
[BULLRUN] If somebody in the belief, however questionable,
that a "technically secure backdoor with a golden key" is possible
had built one, would we be able to notice if our communications were
being exploited?

The common view is that backdoors are symmetric in nature and require 
the presence of malicious logic in the target system code base (i.e., 
everyone with knowledge about the internals of the backdoor can exploit
it and code review can spot their presence). This work challenges this
view. Backdoors can be asymmetric (i.e., the complete code for the 
backdoored system does not enable anyone except the designer to exploit
the backdoor) and be planted in data. Or: to paraphrase a popular quote
on homoiconicity of some programming languages, backdoor is data, data 
is backdoor.

To illustrate the security implications of this family of malicious
security artifacts this work:
  0. Provides a working implementation of a backdoor embedded into the
     RSA modulus of a Certification Authority public-key certificate 
     and the code for a minimalistic client and server communicating 
     over a TLS channel; 
  1. Shows how this backdoor can completely pervert the security 
     guarantees provided by the TLS protocol; 
  2. Argues that, from a network security perspective, the 
     architecture of illusoryTLS resembles the standard architecture
     of web browsers and the associated certificate stores, 
     communicating with web servers over TLS channels; and 
  3. Points out that even the presence of a single CA certificate 
     with a secretly embedded backdoor in the certificate store would
     render the entire TLS security fictional. In fact, the current 
     practice of universal implicit cross-certification makes the whole
     PKI as weak as its weakest link [PG, AA14, Gu11].

Hence, as long as the implementations of RSA -- or, more generally,
algorithms vulnerable to this class of attacks -- used by trusted
entities (e.g., CAs) cannot be audited by relying parties, and
whenever the backdoor designer is a threat to the target users, the
assurance provided by illusoryTLS (i.e., none whatsoever) is not any
different from the assurance provided by systems relying upon TLS for 
origin authentication, confidentiality, and message integrity guarantees.


1. illusoryTLS
illusoryTLS is an instance of the Young and Yung elliptic curve
asymmetric backdoor in RSA key generation.
The security outcome is the worst possible outcome, because the
backdoor completely perverts the security guarantees provided by
the TLS protocol, allowing the attacker to impersonate the endpoints
(i.e., authentication failure), tamper with their messages
(i.e., integrity erosion), and actively eavesdrop their communications
(i.e., confidentiality loss).

The design choices for this backdoor reflect the following threat model.
The backdoor designer can:
0. "insert vulnerabilities into commercial encryption systems,
IT systems, networks and endpoint communications devices used by targets".
1. "influence policies, standards and specifications for commercial
public key technologies". [BULLRUN]
2. interfere with the supply-chain. [EFF]
3. disregard everything about policy. [RJA]
4. or she is simply in the position to build the security module
used by the Certification Authority for generating the key material.

illusoryTLS consists of three modules: a. a HTTPS client; b. a TLS
 server; c. a certificate store. The code is part of network-simple-tls
-- an Haskell library for simple network sockets usage patterns using 
TLS security -- and is used as-is, without any modification [NST]. 

For the sake of simplicity, and without loss of generality, the server
implements an Echo service over TLS. The client sends a basic HTTP
command over a TLS channel an awaits the server response.

From a network security perspective, the architecture of illusoryTLS is
similar to the architecture of standard Web technology, where browsers
-- or other HTTP clients -- and servers rely on database of public-key
certificates (i.e., certificate stores) as trust-anchors in the
validation of the certification paths.


2. Where is the backdoor?
There is one backdoor in illusoryTLS and it is highly robust against 
reverse-engineering. It is hidden in the public-key certificate of the
CA the communicating entities rely upon to mutually authenticate (file
path: env/certificatestore/cacert.pem).

In particular, the upper order bits of the RSA modulus encode the
asymmetric encryption of a seed generated at random. The same seed was
used to generate one of the RSA primes of the CA public-key modulus.
Hence, the RSA modulus is at the same time a RSA public key and an
asymmetric ciphertext that gives to the backdoor designer, and only to
the designer, the ability to factor with ease the said modulus.

No backdoor was slipped into the cryptographic credentials issued to
the communicating endpoints.

3. Related Work
The backdoor hidden in illusoryTLS implements a security notion that
is twenty years old. Adam Young and Moti Yung introduced the notion 
of secretly embedded trapdoor with universal protection (SETUP) at 
Crypto '96 [YY96]. The backdoor hidden in illusoryTLS implements this 
security notion. More specifically, it is an instance of the 
Young and Yung elliptic curve asymmetric backdoor in RSA key 
generation [YY]. The work by Adam Young and Moti Yung expands on the 
research they published in the proceedings of Selected Areas in 
Cryptography 2005 [YY05].  The same authors present a working 
implementation of their attack at http://www.cryptovirology.com/.


4. Security Properties
illusoryTLS has some noteworthy properties.
NOBUS (Nobody But Us): [A14, Go14] The exploitation requires access 
to resources not embedded in the backdoor itself. In this case the 
secret resource is an elliptic-curve private key. Hence, the 
vulnerability can be exploited by the backdoor designer and by whoever 
gains access to the backdoor elliptic-curve private-key or to the 
associated key-recovery system. Hence, it is opportune to ask ourself: 
Is it possible to forbid an enemy intelligence organization from gaining 
access to a private key? Those of us who believe that this is possible
should be inclined to regard secure backdoors as also technical possibility. 
And those of us who believe that all measures to prevent disclosure
of the private-key will be circumvented should be inclined to regard 
backdoors as inherently insecure.

Indistinguishability: As long as a computational hardness assumption
called Elliptic-Curve Decision Diffie-Hellman (ECDDH) holds, the
backdoored key pairs appear to all probabilistic polynomial time
algorithms like genuine RSA key pairs. Therefore black-box access
to the key-generator does not allow detection.

Forward Secrecy: If a reverse-engineer breaches the key-generator,
then the previously stolen information remains confidential (secure
against reverse-engineering).

Reusability: The backdoor can be used multiple times and against
multiple targets.


5. The Impact and the Implications
The backdoor designer can use the private-key recovered by factoring 
the CA public modulus to break the TLS security guarantees at will, 
exposing the relying parties to a variety of attacks. They range 
from impersonation (i.e., authentication failure), to message 
tampering (i.e., integrity erosion), to active eavesdropping of 
encrypted communications (i.e., confidentiality loss), whenever the 
attacker mounts a MITM attack.

In order to exploit the backdoor, the designer needs to retain control
over the key-generation of the target RSA modulus. However, s/he does
not need to have access to any private key used by system actors,
namely the Certification Authority and the communicating endpoints.
Hence, the attacker does not need to purloin code or data from the work
environment (i.e., the attack works without any need to tamper with the
communicating endpoints).

In the Web X.509 PKI the security impact of such backdoor would extend 
further; the presence of a single CA certificate with a secretly embedded 
backdoor in the certificate store renders the entire TLS security 
fictional. In fact, the current practice of universal implicit 
cross-certification makes the whole X.509 PKI as weak as its weakest link.

To see why this is the case, it is necessary to look at how 
cross-certification and trust relationships among CAs are managed 
in theory and in practice.

"Cross certification enables entities in one public key infrastructure
(PKI) to trust entities in another PKI. This mutual trust relationship
[should be] typically supported by a cross-certification agreement
between the certification authorities (CAs) in each PKI. The agreement
establishes the responsibilities and liability of each party." [MS]

"[An explicit] mutual trust relationship between two CAs requires
that each CA issue a certificate to the other to establish the
relationship in both directions. The path of trust is not [hierarchical]
(neither of the governing CAs is subordinate to the other) although
the separate PKIs may be certificate hierarchies. After two CAs have
established and specified the terms of trust and issued certificates
to each other, entities within the separate PKIs can interact subject
to the policies specified in the certificates." [MS] But this is just
in theory.

In practice, "most current PKI software employs a form of implicit
cross-certification in which all root CAs are equally trusted, which
is equivalent to unbounded cross-certification among all CAs. This
means that, for example, any certificate can be trivially replaced
by a masquerader's certificate from another CA, since both CAs are
equally trusted... With the implicit universal cross-certification
that exists in this environment, the security of any certificate is
reduced to that of the least trustworthy CA, who can issue a bogus
certificate to usurp the legitimate one, at the same level of trust."
[PG] The bogus certificates issued to Egypt-based MCS holdings and
installed in a man-in-the-middle proxy [MCS] or the Superfish MitM
adware [SF] are just the most recent examples of exploitation
for this obvious vulnerability.

That is to say that universal implicit cross-certification, or the
lack of constraints on the signer's authority, is to security, or
the absence of unmitigatable surprises [DG2], what ethylene is to
fruit rotting: it makes the whole PKI as weak as its weakest link.
And a CA certificate with a secretly embedded backdoor with the
promise of exclusive exploitation may attract multiple attackers.
With multiple attackers going after a technical opportunity, the
Nobody But Us paradigm would quickly turn into an
Everybody Else But Me concern for those left behind. The race
to exploitation would self-reinforce, leading to a me-too effect.
A scenario that would negate any meaningful security whatsoever.

Therefore, when dealing with this class of attacks in the context
of X.509 Web PKIs, it might be not sufficient to avoid outsourcing
the key generation. It becomes essential also to have assurance
about the security of each implementation of vulnerable
key-generation algorithms employed by trusted credential issuers.

At this time, Mac OS X Yosemite has 211 CA certificates installed.
[OSX] A similar number of certificates is present in the Firefox,
Google Chrome, and Microsoft Windows certificate stores.
Have we sufficient assurance about the hundreds CA certificates
we daily entrust our business upon?

The threats posed by a malicious implementer are not convincingly
mitigated by current IT product security certification.
The CA/Browser Forum requires publicly trusted certificates to be
issued in compliance with the European Standard EN 319 411-3.
According to the standard, the CA key generation shall be carried
out within a device that meets the requirements identified by some
approved protection profiles. The CEN Workshop Agreement 14167
Part 2, 3, and 4 are three of those protection profiles. The
assurance level for these protection profiles is EAL4 augmented.
The augmentation results from product adherence to three additional
requirements ADV_IMP.2, AVA_CCA.1, and AVA_VLA.4. These are focused
on assessing the presence of vulnerabilities in the
Target of Evaluation (TOE) and on guaranteeing that the
implementation representation is an accurate and complete
instantiation of the TOE security functional (TSF) requirements.
Special emphasis is placed on identifying covert channels and on
estimating their capacity --- which is relevant, because SETUP attacks
makes use of the key-generation as a covert channel for itself.
However, the certification process requires the developer the
performance of the vulnerability assessment and documentation tasks.
Of course, this conflicts with our threat model. The evaluator is
left with the documentation and the implementation representation
provided in fulfillment of the certification. Arguably, at the
required Evaluation Assurance Level the assessment may fail to
rule out the presence of backdoors in the key generation. Formal
methods are in fact required only at the two highest levels (EAL6
and EAL7). And the level of detail of the implementation representation
may render backdoor detection unlikely (e.g., HDL at design time,
netlist at fabrication time as candidate representations).

Hence, the key takeaway is the following: as long as the implementations 
of RSA --- or, more generally, algorithms vulnerable to this class of 
attacks --- used by trusted entities (e.g., Certification Authorities) 
cannot be audited by relying parties (e.g., X.509 end-entities), any 
trust-anchor for the same trusted entities (e.g., root certificate) 
is to be regarded as a potential backdoor.

That is to say that as long as the implementation of algorithms
adopted by CAs and vulnerable to this class of backdoors cannot be
audited by relying parties, the assurance provided by illusoryTLS
(i.e., none whatsoever) is not any different from the assurance provided
by systems relying upon TLS and RSA certificates for origin 
authentication, confidentiality, and message integrity guarantees.

A number of mitigation exist, from key pinning (if used properly) [HPKP] 
to Certificate Transparency, to Dane, to Tack, and to proper
explicit cross-certification. But none of them is widely deployed, yet.


6. Backdoor Embedding Algorithm
The subtleness of a backdoor planted in a cryptographic credential
resides in the absence of malicious logic in the systems whose
security it erodes. This is the reason why there is nothing anything
amiss in the illusoryTLS code base. Admittedly funnier, though, is 
the backdoor embedding algorithm. 

The backdoor embedding algorithm used for illusoryTLS is as described 
in Chapter 10 of [YY].

The rest of this section will introduce a novel way to embed an 
elliptic curve asymmetric backdoor into a RSA modulus.

Few weeks after the submission of illusoryTLS to the Underhanded 
Crypto Contest [UCC], Ryan Castellucci published their attack variant 
on GitHub [RC].

The idea is to:
0. embed a Curve25519 public-key into the key-generator,
1. generate an ephemeral Curve25519 key at random,
2. compute a shared secret using Elliptic Curve Diffie-Hellmann,
3. use the shared secret to seed a cryptographically secure
pseudo-random number generator (CSPRNG) based on AES run in CTR mode,
4. generate a normal RSA key using the seeded CSPRNG,
5. replace 32-bytes of the generated modulus with the ephemeral
Curve25519 public-key,
6. use the original prime factors to compute two new primes leading
to a new modulus embedding the ephemeral public-key
7. output the RSA key

To recover the target private key the attacker:
0. extracts the ephemeral Curve25519 public-key from the target modulus,
1. computes the shared secret via Elliptic Curve Diffie-Hellmann and
using the private-key associated to the public-key embedded in the
key-generator,
2. uses the shared secret to seed the cryptographically secure
pseudo-random number generator (CSPRNG) based on AES run in CTR mode,
3. generates a normal RSA key using the seeded CSPRNG,
4. replaces 32-bytes of the generated modulus with the ephemeral
Curve25519 public-key,
5. uses the original prime factors to compute two new primes leading
to the target modulus embedding the ephemeral public-key,
6. output the recovered RSA key.

Although the idea is nice, the key pairs generated using this algorithm
fall short in terms of indistinguishability. In fact it is easy
to tell backdoored certificates apart from genuine RSA certificate
using only black-box access.

The attack embeds a public-key into an RSA modulus. Elliptic curve
public-keys are points on the curve. And elliptic-curve points are
easily distinguished from uniform random strings. Hence, a security
evaluator could check if the coordinates encoded using the candidate
32-byte substrings of the modulus satisfy the elliptic curve equation.
Can the backdoor be repaired? How?

If the backdoor designer could make the elliptic curve points 
indistinguishable from random strings, then the backdoor 
indistinguishability would be retained.
Designed by Daniel J. Bernstein et al. with the goal to make
anti-censorship protocols undetectable, Elligator [E] provides 
an encoding for points on a single curve as strings indistinguishable 
from uniform random strings.

All cyber security technology is inherently dual use. This long-held
and well-sustained belief [DG] is corroborated by Elligator.
Undetectability of curve points, just like any and all cyber security
tools, can be used for good or ill; for censorship-circumvention or
for surveillance.

Yet, it is possible to positively contribute to the discussion and 
practice of information security by walking the fine line between 
offense and defense. In this spirit, what follows are: 
- a backdoor embedding algorithm based on Elligator, and 
- the associated key-recovery algorithm.
This backdoor embedding algorithm makes sure that the backdoored 
RSA key-pairs are indistinguishable from genuine RSA key-pairs.

The key-generation proceeds as follows:
0. embed a Curve25519 public-key into the key-generator,
1. generate an ephemeral Curve25519 key at random and the
associated uniform representative string,
2. compute a shared secret using Elliptic Curve Diffie-Hellmann,
3. use the shared secret to seed a cryptographically secure
pseudo-random number generator (CSPRNG) based on AES run in CTR mode,
4. generate a normal RSA key using the seeded CSPRNG,
5. replace 32-bytes of the generated modulus with the representative
string associated to the ephemeral Curve25519 public-key,
6. use the original prime factors to compute two new primes leading
to a new modulus embedding the uniform representative string,
7. output the RSA key.

To recover the target private key the attacker:
0. extracts the representative string from the target modulus,
1. maps the representative string to the candidate ephemeral Curve25519
public-key,
2. computes the shared secret via Elliptic Curve Diffie-Hellmann and
using the private-key associated to the public-key embedded in the
key-generator,
3. uses the shared secret to seed the cryptographically secure
pseudo-random number generator (CSPRNG) based on AES run in CTR mode,
4. generates a normal RSA key using the seeded CSPRNG,
5. replaces 32-bytes of the generated modulus with the representative
string found in the target modulus,
6. uses the original prime factors to compute two new primes leading
to the target modulus embedding the uniform representative string,
7. output the recovered RSA key.


7. References

 [A14] Dave Aitel, 'Nobody But Us', Daily Dave mailing list,
       https://lists.immunityinc.com/pipermail/dailydave/
       2014-April/000656.html

[AA14] Axel Arnback, Hadi Asghari, Michel Van Eeten, Niko Van Eljk,
       Security Collapse in the HTTPS Market,
       https://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=2673311

[BULLRUN] COMPUTER NETWORK OPERATIONS. SIGINT ENABLING.
          https://www.eff.org/files/2014/04/09/
          20130905-guard-sigint_enabling.pdf

[DG]  Geer Jr. D. E., (2014); Cybersecurity as Realpolitik.
      http://geer.tinho.net/geer.blackhat.6viii14.txt

[DG2] Geer Jr. D. E., (2014); Security of Things, Cambridge
      http://geer.tinho.net/geer.secot.7v14.txt

[E]   Bernstein D. J., Hamburg M., Krasnova A., and Lange T. (2013);
      Elligator, http://elligator.cr.yp.to/

[EFF] 20150117-Spiegel-Supply-chain Interdiction.
      Stealthy Techniques Can Crack Some of SIGINT's Hardest Targets
      https://www.eff.org/document/
      20150117-spiegel-supply-chain-interdiction-stealthy-techniques-
      can-crack-some-sigints

[HPKP] Evans, C. et al (2015); Public Key Pinning Extension for HTTP,
       RFC 7469, IETF


[Go14] Jack Goldsmith, 'Cyber Paradox: Every Offensive Weapon is a
       (Potential) Chink in Our Defense — and Vice Versa'
       http://www.lawfareblog.com/2014/04/
       cyber-paradox-every-offensive-weapon-is-a-potential-chink-
       in-our-defense-and-vice-versa/

[Gu11] Peter Gutmann, Diginotar broken arrow as a tour-de-force of PKI
       fail, Cryptography Randombit mailing list, 
       http://comments.gmane.org/
       gmane.comp.security.cryptography.randombit/1215

 [MC] Adam L. Young and Moti M. Yung, 'Malicious Cryptography,
      Exposing Cryptovirology', 2004, ISBN: 0-7645-4975-8, J. Wiley

[MCS] Langley A. (2015); Maintaining digital certificate security
      http://googleonlinesecurity.blogspot.it/2015/03/
      maintaining-digital-certificate-security.html

[MS]  Microsoft, Cross Certification,
      https://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/windows/desktop/
      bb540800(v=vs.85).aspx


 [NST] Renzo Carbonara, network-simple-tls, Haskell library for simple
       network sockets usage patterns using TLS security,
       https://github.com/k0001/network-simple-tls

[OSX] List of available trusted root certificates in OS X Yosemite
      https://support.apple.com/en-us/HT202858

[PG]  Gutmann, P. (2002); PKI: It's Not Dead, Just Resting.
      Computer (35,8), IEEE, 0018-9162
      https://www.cs.auckland.ac.nz/~pgut001/pubs/notdead.pdf

[RC]  Castellucci, R. (2015); rsabd.py
      https://gist.github.com/ryancdotorg/18235723e926be0afbdd

[SF]  Bonneau J. and Eckersley P. and Hoffman-Andrews J. (2015);
      Lenovo Is Breaking HTTPS Security on its Recent Laptops
      https://www.eff.org/deeplinks/2015/02/
      further-evidence-lenovo-breaking-https-security-its-laptops

[UCC] Underhanded Crypto Contest. https://underhandedcrypto.com/


  [YY] Adam L. Young and Moti M. Yung, 'An Elliptic Curve Asymmetric
       Backdoor in OpenSSL RSA Key Generation', Advances in 
       Cryptovirology, to apper, http://www.cryptovirology.com/

[YY05] Adam L. Young and Moti M. Yung, 'A Space Efficient Backdoor
       in RSA and its Applications'. In Bart Preneel and Stafford E. 
       Tavares, editors, Selected Areas in Cryptography -- '05, 
       pp 128-143, Spring, 2005, Lecture Notes in Computer Science 
       No. 3897.

[YY96] Adam L. Young and Moti M. Yung, 'The Dark Side of Black-Box
       Cryptography, or: Should we trust Capstone?'. In Advances in
       Cryptology---Crypto '96, N. Koblitz (Ed.), LNCS 1109, 
       pp. 89-103, 1996.
